create mongodb encryption article (#310)
prisma/dataguide: content/08-mongodb/14-mongodb-encryption.mdx

This feature ensures the security of encryption required fields on both the server and the network, accessible only by appropriate clients. At all times, sensitive data is encrypted on the database host and in network transit. Security responsibility shifts to the client. CSFLE prevents all of the vulnerabilities described throughout: database privilege abuse, network snooping, data theft, and access memory of a database host.

## Rotating encryption keys
There is always the risk of the symmetric key becoming compromised for encryption at rest and Client-Side Field Level encryption. Like you should do with your critical internet account passwords, you should also change your encryption keys regularly. This practice is rotating encryption keys.

Encryption key rotation is crucial for database administrators to consider because while it is not surefire protection against a compromised key, it strongly avoids the risk. If a key gets compromised, then there is a likely chance that it has already become outdated for accessing sensitive data. It is another task to maintain, but it is a better practice to employ and never need than to be caught without doing it and wishing you had.

> MongoDB Atlas encryption at rest and CSFLE have built-in guides to rotate the required keys for each KMS cloud provider you might be using: [AWS KMS](https://docs.atlas.mongodb.com/tutorial/security-aws-kms-rotate-key/), [Azure Vault](https://docs.atlas.mongodb.com/tutorial/security-azure-kms-rotate-key/), and [Google KMS](https://docs.atlas.mongodb.com/tutorial/security-gcp-kms-rotate-key/). If you are self-hosting MongoDB, there are guides for conducting [manual key rotation](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/rotate-encryption-key/) and also MongoDB's [Ops Manager](https://docs.opsmanager.mongodb.com/current/tutorial/rotate-master-kmip-keys/index.html) and [Cloud Manager](https://docs.cloudmanager.mongodb.com/tutorial/rotate-master-kmip-keys/index.html) platforms. 

Reviewer: These are all great links.  Pulling these out into a bulleted list is another option if you think it'd help them stand out better.

---
title: 'How MongoDB encrypts data'
metaTitle: "Understanding data encryption in MongoDB"
metaDescription: "Learn how MongoDB encrypts data to ensure security in all database instances"
metaImage: '/social/generic-mongodb.png'
authors: ['alexemerich']
---

## Introduction
Today’s world runs on data. The data that an organization creates, stores, and exchanges are its most valuable asset. Data encryption is a critical practice for all organizations for their protection, users’ protection, and compliance with data privacy regulations. An organization should make sure that internal users should be only able to view data relevant to them. Even more so, an organization needs to secure its data against compromise and unauthorized access. 

The need for data encryption is even more paramount for organizations handling sensitive information. In this article, we discuss why you should encrypt your data in addition to robust [authentication](/intro/database-glossary#authentication) and [authorization](/intro/database-glossary#authorization) measures, the different types of encryption in [MongoDB](/intro/database-glossary#mongodb), and encryption best practices.

<PrismaOutlinks>

> Prisma's [MongoDB connector](https://www.prisma.io/docs/concepts/database-connectors/mongodb) has recently been [promoted to general availability](https://www.prisma.io/blog/mongodb-general-availability-pixnun6mffmu)!  With this change, you can use the [Prisma Client](https://www.prisma.io/docs/concepts/components/prisma-client) to manage production MongoDB databases with confidence.

Reviewer: Just a note that we probably want to switch this one out with something else before publication.  I don't think we've gotten much feedback on where to link to specifically yet, so your call.

Author: Yeah agreed. I may hold off until we get a bit more definitive answer or just remove the mention of launch week. Can delay until I have the image assets as well.

- Symmetric Encryption - A method where the encryption key and the decryption key are the same (symmetrical)
- Asymmetric Encryption - A method also known as public key cryptography that creates two different keys, a private key and a public key that are not identical. The public key can be shared with anyone, and the private key only with authorized people. The public key can be used to encrypt data that can only be decrypted by the private key.

Both methods have some inherent vulnerabilities depending on the data status but cover up RBAC missed issues like networking snooping and data theft. This assurance is why MongoDB employs both methods across its databases, depending on the data state.  

### Encryption in transit
[Encryption in transit](/intro/database-glossary#encryption-transport) is securing data when it is in motion from one point to another. Before being sent, the data is encrypted for its “journey” and then decrypted and verified at the reception point. The best visualization is to imagine the data as money transported via an armored van from one bank branch to another to replenish the vault. 

> [MongoDB Atlas] supports [transport layer security (TSL)] and secure socket layer (SSL) for communications between application client and server and within intra-cluster communications by setting certificates for the servers. A certificate is an electronic document used to prove the validity of ownership of a public key. Certificates ensure data is encrypted for transport over a trusted network connection preventing network snooping activities such as packet sniffing or IP/DNS spoofing. 

Author: AH! I don't know why my links are coming through from copying over. Thanks for catching.

With the inclusion of a public key, we see that MongoDB utilizes asymmetric encryption to secure data in a state of motion. This is because of an inherent vulnerability in symmetric encryption for data in transit. The secret symmetric key must remain secure during the transmission. To secure this original key, you must encrypt it and create another key to decrypt. This cycle can continue infinitely, where every key in transmission is then reliant on another made key to secure it. Asymmetric encryption theoretically solves this insecure transmission problem with its public keys. 

By encrypting with a public key, the sender’s message can only be decrypted by the intended recipient with their private key. Public key cryptography is advantageous in transit because there is no need to ever share private keys and the use of signatures ensures a recipient can verify that a message comes from a trusted sender. 

> The risk for servers relying on the asymmetric encryption is that the public key is not authentic and generated in bad faith or by a malicious entity. Anyone can access a public key to encrypt data, but only the private key owner can decrypt the data.

Author: I am just going to scrap this. I have been reading about the potential for compromised public keys whereas someone would replace Bob's key with their own generated key for example. It would get discovered quickly most likely, but that could already be too late. I am just going to speak instead to the disadvantage of asymmetric encryption taking longer.

> The downside to asymmetric encryption is that is does take longer than symmetric encryption and requires more resource consumption to achieve. If your data is not actively moving from device to device or network-to-network, then these tradeoffs are not necessary to undertake and symmetric encryption provides ample security.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how much we need to go into this, but one comment I have is that the asymmetric keys are only used to establish the connection securely, so the asymmetric overhead is a fixed cost.  Once that is done (both parties trust each other, identity has been confirmed, whatever is outlined in the connection parameters you're using) since the asymmetric keys are used to create a symmetric key that is used for the actual data for the remainder of the connection, the overhead drops off.

So basically: the overhead of asymmetric encryption only applies once per connection (it isn't a cost you pay for every message over that connection).  As I said, I'm not sure if we need to go into that, but I wanted to clarify in case that changes how we talk about the relative cost / benefits of the asymmetric keys a bit.

MongoDB Atlas uses [Let’s Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/) known certificates to authenticate TLS enabled clients once they pass access and authentication controls.  TLS protocol provides integrity and authenticity by using certificates between two or more computer applications. MongoDB can communicate across a network that prevents unwanted eavesdropping and tampering by using this protocol. You can refer to the [official MongoDB documentation](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/tutorial/configure-ssl-clients/?jmp=partners_townsend) for TLS configuration for clients.

### Encryption at rest
Encryption at rest is sufficient for securing data that is not in a state of transit but idle. You can best visualize encrypted data at rest like secured money in a vault in a bank branch. It is no longer in transit to another branch but stationary in a single place. This static state avoids the transmission insecurity that asymmetric encryption solves, so symmetric encryption is a strong method. 

> Encrypted data on disk remains encrypted unless an attacker has access to the encryption key(s). Encryption at rest assures against data theft in the case of lost or stolen physical drives or an exposed database file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Encrypted data on disk remains encrypted unless an attacker has access to the encryption key(s). Encryption at rest protects sensitive data in the case of lost or stolen physical drives or an exposed database file.
```

> Encryption at rest secures data that is not in a state of transit but idle. You can best visualize encrypted data at rest like secured money in a vault in a bank branch. It is no longer in transit to another branch but stationary in a single place. This static state avoids the transmission insecurity that asymmetric encryption solves, so symmetric encryption is a strong method. 

Reviewer: > This static state avoids the transmission insecurity that asymmetric encryption solves, so symmetric encryption is a strong method. 

Instead of talking about transmission insecurity, it might make sense to position this as just "you don't need asymmetric encryption for data at rest because there's never a second party involved" or whatever.  Just as a way of reiterating the idea that asymmetric encryption is a solution to privacy concerns between parties.
